# Datasets API

## Required properties

A published dataset has the following required properties. Drafts require only `data_catalog` and `title`.
| Field         | key           | value                                                                |
|---------------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Data Catalog  | data_catalog  | str                                                                  |
| Title         | title         | dict                                                                 |
| Description   | description   | dict                                                                 |
| Access Rights | access_rights | object                                                               |
| Actors        | actors        | object, at least one "creator" role and exactly one "publisher" role |



### Access Rights

Information about who can access the resource or an indication of its security status. [^2]

A dataset whose files are publicly available should have access type "Open" from the reference data.
Access type is used by Etsin to determine who can download IDA files from the dataset. The supported types are:

- Open: Anyone can access the data.
- Login: Only logged in users can access the data.
- Embargo: Data can accessed starting from `available` date. If `available` is not set, data will not become accessible.
- Permit: Data can be accessed only after requesting permission. Not implemented yet.
- Restricted: Data access is not allowed.

For the restrictive access types it is recommended to add one or more restriction grounds values to indicate why access
to the data is restricted.

The available access rights fields are:

| Field               | key                    | value                                                                |
|---------------------|------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Description         | description            | dict                                                                 |
| Access Type         | access_type (required) | reference data from `/v3/reference-data/access-types`                |
| Restriction Grounds | restriction_grounds    | list of reference data from `/v3/reference-data/restriction-grounds` |
| Available date      | available              | date when data is available for download                             |
| License             | license                | list of objects                                                      |

License is special kind of reference data object, as it can have additional metadata properties
that are writable by the user:

- custom_url
- description

The `custom_url` and `description` fields allow specifying additional information to the selected license.
If `custom_url` is set without providing `url`, the "Other" license is used by default.

If the dataset has a license that is not in the reference data, choose the best matching
"Other" type license in `url` and add a URL to the actual license as `custom_url` and/or describe the license in `description`.


!!! example

    ``` json
    ---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/dataset_api/access_rights.json"
    ```

### Data Catalog

This is the id of the Data Catalog object that can be seen in `/v3/data-catalogs` list.

### Actors

Dataset actors describe persons and organizations that have had a role in creating the dataset.

Each actor has an organization and optionally a person. Actors may have one more roles from the 
list of supported roles: `creator`, `publisher`, `curator`, `rights_holder`, `contributor`. Each dataset
should at have at least one `creator`.

Actors, persons and organizations each have an `id` value that can be used when creating or updating actors:
- If no `id` is provided, identical objects are considered the same. Changes to the object
  will produce a new object that replaces the existing one.
- If an `id` is provided, all objects with same `id` are considered the same. This allows updating
  existing objects. 
- A temporary `id` in format `#value` can be used to create a new object for each different `id` value.
  The actual `id` is generated by Metax.
- Object can be provided with only `id` field if it already exists in the dataset or elsewhere in the request.

Actor, person and organization objects are not shared across datasets
(except for reference data) and will have different `id` values in different datasets even.

Reference data organizations are listed in `/v3/organizations`. When updating a dataset,
reference data organizations are identified by `url` or `id`.
Using `url` is preferred as it will be the same across different Metax instances.
Any changes to reference data organizations in a request are ignored. The fields
`url` and `in_scheme` have values only for reference data organizations.

As a special case, `roles` are ignored when determining which actors are same. Repeated instances
of same object in the `actors` list will be merged into one actor with all the values in `roles`.

!!! Example

    ``` json
    ---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/dataset_api/actors.json"
    ```


## Publishing datasets

By default, new datasets are created as drafts and have `"state": "draft"`. Draft datasets
are not visible to the general public until they are published. To publish a draft dataset,
send a `POST` request to `/v3/datasets/<id>/publish`.

To create a dataset and immediately publish it in a single request, create it with `"state": "publish"`.
The state of an existing dataset can only be changed with the dataset publishing endpoint.

### Updating published datasets

Changes to a published dataset are public immediately. It is also possible to
create a linked temporary draft dataset with `/v3/datasets/<id>/create-draft`.
This returns a copy of the dataset with a new `id` and a `draft_of` field that refers
to the original dataset. To apply changes made to the linked draft, send a `POST` request to
`/v3/datasets/<id of draft>/publish`. This will update the published dataset and delete
the linked draft dataset.

Removing a published dataset with `DELETE /v3/datasets/<id>` will hide it from listings
by default but it will still be available with the `?include_removed=true` query parameter.
Deleting a draft removes it permanently.


## Optional properties


There are multiple optional fields can be used to provide additional information about the dataset:

| Field                   | key               | value                                                              |
|-------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Issued date             | issued            | date                                                               |
| Keywords                | keyword           | list of str                                                        |
| Field of Science        | field_of_science  | list of reference data from `/v3/reference-data/fields-of-science` |
| Language                | language          | list of reference data from `/v3/reference-data/language`          |
| Research Infrastructure | infrastructure    | list of reference data from `/v3/reference-data/research-infras`   |
| Theme                   | theme             | list of reference data from `/v3/reference-data/themes`            |
| Other identifiers       | other_identifiers | list of object                                                     |
| Provenance              | provenance        | list of object                                                     |
| Spatial coverage        | spatial           | list of object                                                     |
| Temporal coverage       | temporal          | list of object                                                     |
| Remote resources        | remote_resources  | list of object                                                     |
| Metadata owner          | metadata_owner    | object                                                             |


### Language

A language of the resource. This refers to the natural language used for textual metadata (i.e., titles, descriptions, etc.) of a cataloged resource (i.e., dataset or service) or the textual values of a dataset distribution. [^1]

Language field is a list of language reference data objects. Only url field is required to add language reference. Both of definitions below are valid objects:

!!! example

    ``` json
    ---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/dataset_api/language.json"
    ```

### Spatial coverage

Spatial coverage describes the spatial characteristics of the dataset.
The optional `reference` field should contain a location from reference data.
The `custom_wkt` field allows specifying geometry as WKT strings in WGS84 coordinate system.

!!! Example

    ``` json
    ---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/dataset_api/spatial.json"
    ```


### Temporal coverage

Temporal coverage describes the temporal characteristics of the resource.

Specify `start_date` and `end_date` date values to indicate a period of time.
Only one of the values is required, e.g. `end_date` can be left out to signify
an ongoing process.

!!! Example

    ``` json
    ---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/dataset_api/temporal.json"
    ```

### Relations

The `relation` list allows describing other entities that a dataset is related to.

!!! Example

    ``` json
    ---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/dataset_api/relation.json"
    ```

### Remote Resources

Remote resources allow associating dataset with data available on the Internet.
Dataset files and remote resources are exclusive with each other, so a dataset cannot have both.

!!! Example

    ``` json
    ---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/dataset_api/remote_resources.json"
    ```

### Metadata owner

Metadata owner describes who owns the dataset. Normally this is determined
automatically on dataset creation based on authenticated user and can be omitted.
Special privileges are required to change the automatically assigned values.

``` json
---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/dataset_api/metadata_owner.json"
```



#### Versions

Revisions are named changes to singular dataset. Single dataset can have as many revisions as it needs. Versions are two or more datasets that represents series of datasets in the same set. Versions never share same persistent identifier or id. Versions are only created when user explicitly wants to create one. Revisions are created automatically. 

#### Enabling versioning on dataset

Dataset needs to be on datacatalog with `dataset_versioning_enabled` set to true.

#### Working with versions

Datasets have `previous_version`, `next_version`, `first_version`, `last_version` and `other_versions` fields that have links to other versions of the dataset. Published revisions can be queried from `/v3/datasets/{id}/revisions` endpoint. 

## Dataset files

A dataset can have files associated with it, and associated files and directories can have
additional dataset-specific metadata. All associated files have to be from the same file storage (e.g. same IDA project).

When viewing a dataset with `GET /v3/datasets/<id>`, the response includes a summary of its file data in the `fileset` object. For example:

!!! example

    ```
    {
      ...
      "fileset": {
          "storage_service": "ida",
          "csc_project": "project",
          "total_files_count": 2,
          "total_files_size": 2048
      }
    }
    ```

### Browsing dataset files

Dataset files can be viewed as a flat list or browsed as a directory tree:

- `GET /v3/datasets/<id>/files` View flat list of dataset files.
- `GET /v3/datasets/<id>/directories` View root directory of dataset files.
- `GET /v3/datasets/<id>/directories?path=<path>` View content of path `<path>`, e.g. `?path=/data/subdir/`.

The endpoints support the same parameters as corresponding
`/v3/files` and `/v3/directories` endpoints and use pagination by default.

The returned files and directories have dataset-specified metadata included
in the `dataset_metadata` field, or `null` if metadata is not set.

### Adding, updating or removing dataset files

Files be added to and removed from unpublished draft datasets. Files can be added to
published datasets only if the dataset is cumulative or if there are no existing files 
in the dataset.

To modify dataset file associations, include file storage parameters
(i.e. `storage_service`, `project`) and a `directory_actions` or `file_actions` list in
fileset object when creating or updating a dataset.

For example, to update files of an existing dataset, use `PATCH /v3/datasets/<id>` with `{"fileset": <fileset object>}`.

The fileset object should look like

```
{
  "storage_service": <service, e.g. ida>,
  "csc_project": <project>,
  "directory_actions": [
    {
      "pathname": <path, e.g. /data/>,
      "action": <action>,
      "dataset_metadata": <directory metadata object>
    }
  ],
  "file_actions": [
    {
      "id": <id>,
      "action": <action>
      "dataset_metadata": <file metadata object>
    }
  ]
}
```

where the optional action value is is one of

- "add" (default): Add file or all files in directory to dataset, update `dataset_metadata` if present.
- "update": Only update `dataset_metadata` without adding or removing files.
- "remove": Remove file or all files in directory and subdirecories from dataset.

In addition to `id`, file actions also support identifying files by `storage_identifier` or `pathname`.

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! NOTE
    Operations are performed based on the end result of doing all actions in the listed order but
    with `directory_actions` always before `file_actions`. E.g. removing `/data/` and
    adding `/data/subdir/` in the same request will remove everything from `/data/`
    except `subdir`. Any metadata attached to `subdir` will remain.

If `dataset_metadata` is present but set to `null`, existing metadata will be removed.
Metadata is also removed if the file or directory is no longer in the dataset after the operations.

The response fileset object will include the normal fileset summary and additional
values `added_files_count` and `removed_files_count` which tell how many
files were added and how many files were removed by the operations.

### Cumulative datasets

Cumulative datasets are datasets where new files can be added after publication without 
creating a new dataset version. The cumulation status can be changed using the `cumulative_state`
parameter. It has the following possible values:

- `0`: (default): Non-cumulative. Files cannot be added after publication.
- `1`: Cumulation active. Files can be added even after publication.
- `2`: Cumulation closed. Files can no longer be added.

If a dataset has been published, the only allowed change to `cumulative_state` is from
active to closed.

### Dataset file and directory metadata fields

The following fields are supported in dataset-specific file and directory metadata:

| Field                  | key          | value                                                   |
|------------------------|--------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| Title                  | title        | str                                                     |
| Description            | description  | str                                                     |
| File type (files only) | file_type    | reference data from `/v3/reference-data/file-type`      |
| Use category           | use_category | reference data from `/v3/reference-data/use-categories` |

### Examples

#### Creating minimal dataset with files from directory

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
!!! example
    `POST /v3/datasets`
    ```json
    ---8<--- "tests/unit/docs/examples/test_data/minimal_dataset_with_files.json"
    ```
[^1]: [DCAT 3 Property: Language](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat-3/#Property:resource_language)
[^2]: [DCAT 3 Property: Access Rights](https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-dcat-3/#Property:resource_access_rights)
